.. _process-systems_engineering:

Systems and Software Engineering
--------------------------------

The Systems Engineering Management Plan (SEMP) [John11]_ defines the overall
system engineering processes to support the design and constructions of the GMT.
This section provides an overview of how Software Engineering practices are used
to complement the SEMP with the goal of addressing the specific issues of
software development.

The GMT software development process is based on the Systems and software
engineering described in the standard, Software Life Cycle Processes
[ISO12207]_, with the goal to achieve tailored conformity for most of the
processes. One purpose for adopting this standard is to establish processes that
facilitate communication among participants during the software development life
cycle. Some of the terminologies used here are consistent with those defined in
the standard.

Some of the processes are implemented as part of the GMT SEMP while others are
software specific. The Software and Controls Handbook [Filg13b]_ section on
Software Engineering and Quality Assurance presents the ISO/IEC 12207 Conformity
Matrix.  The standard is tailored to specific characteristics of the GMT
project, with the main driver being to provide only the necessary amount of
formality to expedite communication among the partners, and to provide a
foundation for assessing Quality Assurance.

The standard establishes the Life Cycle Process of a project, based upon the
general principles of systems engineering. The general premise behind the
standard is that no matter how small or simple the system is – even if the whole
system consists of a single processor – software is an integral part of that
system. Also, the standard distinguishes system requirements analysis from
software requirements analysis: system architectural design allocates
requirements to various items at the system level, and subsequent analysis flows
down software requirements to allocate to each software item. After the flow
down process, the software is designed, produced, and integrated into the
system.

The Software and Controls Handbook captures some recommendations from the
ECSS-E-ST-40C – Software Systems [ECSS09]_, ECSS-E-ST-60-10C – Control Systems
[ECSS13]_ ESA standards, and the recently published (summer 2013) NASA Software
Engineering Handbook [NASA13]_.


